we don't need electricity - the last 100
years humanity has survived without it
since the dawn of time the truth is
we've forgotten how to live without and
we've also become accustomed to the
conveniences it provides fortunate for
us technology also provides methods for
us to generate our own electricity lots
of folks look to alternative energy for
various reasons some do so to offset
electric bills some choose to do so for
environmental reasons but Preppers do it
for control and self-reliance in my case
I looked a solar to provide my grid down
needs the tin at ranch solar system
isn't designed to offset my electric
bill nor is it designed to replace all
of my electrical once in a normal world
it's designed to provide the power to
maintain a lifestyle of reasonable
convenience should the grid go down for
a day a week or forever
the do-it-yourself off-grid solar system
can be somewhat intimidating in reality
it's composed of five components solar
panels to generate the power a charge
controller to charge the batteries the
batteries to store the energy the
inverter to provide AC to the house all
items you wish to power and lastly lots
and lots of questions the purpose of
this video series is to answer the
questions for the rest of the components
we turn to a company called Rena G the
tin hat ranch off-grid solar system is
typical of the type of system you might
look for for your grid down needs as
well as a typical off-grid cabin system
from Rena G we chose for 100 watt
monocrystalline panels a 40 amp MPPT
charge controller a 1000 watt pure sine
wave inverter and to store the energy we
went to batteries plus 4 for 6 volt golf
cart batteries totalling 470 amp hours
don't worry about all that jargon now
you'll learn what it means in the rest
of the series for now just note that
there's links below in the description
to all the products used as well as a
link to the complete list of parts and a
schematic amongst other information the
first question I'm betting on
everybody's mind is what will the system
like this run but before I answer that
question let me put things in a bit of
perspective the average American
household uses 30 kilowatts of
electricity every day if you were to
attempt to replace that usage and looked
at the cost for most of us it would be
financially unattainable but as I
mentioned before that's not the point of
a system like this in my area the 4 100
watt R energy panels that I chose will
provide me with about one and a half
kilowatts of power per day well that's
only about 5% of what the average
American household uses it's more than
enough to run the things I need to
maintain a semblance of my lifestyle if
the grid should go down I can have a
freezer power lighting pump water
maintain communications use tools and
charge every little device I have from
flashlights to Kindles I can also
maintain some of the simple pleasures in
life have a movie night with popcorn and
even brew a pot or two of coffee I'd bet
that most folks don't flip on a light
switch and take a mental note of how
much power they're spending but that's
the key to relying on solar in a grid
down world in today's world most people
don't consider how much power they use
they don't quantify it why because they
don't have to you can keep plugging
things in and it doesn't matter there's
no consequences except maybe a little
increase in your electric bill but the
electric bill consists of a smaller and
smaller portion of people's income in a
grid down solar power world things will
be very different not only will you have
to understand the power that you're
using but you're going to have to treat
it like your bank account you can only
make so much power every day store so
much power every day and you can never
spend more than you make thinking about
solar power like money is a good way to
look at things we can talk watts amps
and volts all day long and I can
actually see your eyes rolling in your
back your head they're through the
camera but if we talk about it like it's
money everybody can understand that
you're going to need to assess your
situation to understand what you need
for your off-grid solar system assessing
your situation is a critical step in the
leap towards solar and I found the best
tool to
as your electrical needs is the kilowatt
meter the kilowatt meter measures two
things you have to know how much energy
your devices draw at any given moment
and how much power they consume over
time I've got a link in the description
below to the meter even if you don't
move forward with a solar system this
meter can work wonders in showing you
where you can save big money on your
electric bill and at less than 20 bucks
it's a no-brainer
let's take a look at this chest freezer
to show you how the kilowatt meter works
the device itself is very simple it goes
in line with whatever you're testing
simply plug it in press the Watts button
and it shows you the instantaneous draw
of whatever it is that it's plugged in
this freezer draws around 80 watts of
instantaneous power if I leave it on for
an hour it consumes 80 watt hours of
energy you may have noticed that devices
like freezers don't run continuously and
that's where the second function of the
kilowatt meter comes in handy
it measures electrical usage over time
leaving this freezer plugged in for 24
hours shows that it consumes 840 watt
hours of energy per day keep in mind
that not all devices are on all the time
take this LED light bulb for instance
this LED light bulb draws about seven
watts if you leave it on for an hour
it draws seven watt hours of energy if
you figure that you're going to need
this light bulb for four hours a day on
average put it down for 28 watt hours of
energy need 10 of them it's 280 watt
hours continue to use the kilowatt meter
to measure the electrical consumption on
every device that you feel that you
should need your the grid go down now
there's some devices that you can't plug
into the kilowatt meter for those we've
included a worksheet in the description
below on how to estimate the electrical
consumption of things like pumps blowers
and things that are hardwired lastly
you're going to have to figure out how
many of the devices you're going to want
to run at the same time this will
determine the size of your inverter the
inverters function is to take DC power
from the batteries and convert it to AC
power for use with household appliances
I have a thousand watt inverter
this means I can run up to a thousand
watts worth of devices at the same time
in the example of the freezer we're
talking about 85 watts this coffeepot
takes about 800 watts the four LED light
bulbs we talked about earlier would take
28 watts
that's about 900 watts of power or just
under the limit of the inverter
once you've evaluated every device that
you feel that you're going to need
should the grid go down you're gonna
have a good idea of how much power you
need to generate each day it's as simple
as adding the watt hours together
unfortunately with solar there's one
more factor you have to contend with and
it's determined by where you live and
that is the number of Sun hours that
you're going to get on average every day
and this is where a company like R
energy can come into play you see the
amount of power your panels will
generate is determined by the number of
Sun hours on average your area receives
I figured that I would need about a
kilowatt of power each day to run the
essentials as I mentioned earlier my
area receives around 4.2 hours of Sun on
average every day now I could generate
the needed amount of power with 300 watt
panels again simple math 300 Watts times
4.2 equals a bit over 1200 watt hours a
person in the desert Southwest might get
seven eight or even nine hours a day
it's almost possible for a person in
California Arizona or Nevada to generate
a thousand watts with a single 100 watt
panel per day if you're in a scoot
viewer of the 10 Hat ranch and we all
know everybody who watches the tin hat
ranches and the Stu viewer you'll notice
that I said I have four panels and not
three this is because I want to quickly
be able to recharge my batteries and
have a margin for error
after cloudy days and in the winter as
far as solar systems go our grid down
system is pretty small so adding a panel
or two to your system is not going to
break the budget I'd recommend that you
do the same once you've determined how
much energy you need to generate give R
energy a call and tell them your
location or your approximate location
and then we'll help you size your system
whenever we do something like this at
the tenant ranch we try to find vendors
that are best-in-class
in the case of a small to medium-sized
off-grid solar system renergie is one of
the best there's links below in the
description to get a hold of renergie
for most of us an off-grid solar system
means generating power via 21st century
technology and storing it and let acid
batteries which have their roots
centuries ago now while let acid
batteries have many drawbacks they do
have a positive attribute the the
cheapest way to store energy they're not
the lightest they're not the most
forgiving they're not the most efficient
but we can afford them in the first
video we introduced you into the concept
of thinking of solar power like it's
money and the first general rule is you
can only spend what you make but
batteries introduce two more rules into
the equation you can only save so much
and you can never spend all that you
save you see energy is generally not
used directly from the panel's its first
stored in the battery you can generate
all the power that you want but if you
don't have anywhere to send it and you
don't use it on demand the energy simply
wasted so you can only store as much
power as you have battery capacity the
tin hat ranch battery bank consists of
four six volt Duracell SLI GC 125 golf
cart batteries from Batteries Plus we
chose golf cart batteries for good
reason think of them as entry-level
solar batteries now the batteries that
you might be most familiar with car
batteries are truly the wrong choice to
store and utilize energy from a solar
system car batteries are designed to
deliver massive amounts of energy in a
very short period of time and then
recharge slowly golf cart batteries are
designed to deliver a lower amount of
power over a longer period of time and
then recharge quickly car batteries
compared to golf cart batteries are very
poor at delivering lower current for
longer periods of time such as running
appliances or lights overnight while a
car battery would technically work in a
solar system the golf cart battery is
far more suited to the application it's
for these reasons that even if you think
you're saving money with the car battery
the golf cart battery is going to
deliver more energy per dollar and last
longer to boot we chose a size our grid
down battery bank at 12 volts and while
it's true a 24 or 48 volt battery bank
might be more efficient the 12 volt is
more economical weight
a little light might have just gone off
in your head a 12 volt system with 6
volt batteries I'd appreciate it if all
your electrical geniuses would hit down
for just a second yes by connecting to 6
volt batteries in series we make a
single 12 volt battery when you take 2
batteries and connect one of the
positive terminals to one of the
negative terminals and then you draw
your power from the remaining two
terminals you've made a 12 volt battery
out of 2 6 volt batteries each battery
is rated at 235 amp hours in our case
but in series both batteries together
are still only 235 amp hours but now at
12 volts this is because an amp at 12
volts is double the energy of an amp at
6 volts in our system because we want
the end result to be 12 volts we take
the other two batteries and make them
into a series as well then we connect
the 2 series together by connecting the
two remaining positives together as well
as the two remaining negatives when we
connect the two sets of batteries
together we double the amperage what we
end up with is a 12 volt battery bank
with a 470 amp hour capacity in effect
we've created a parallel string of two
12-volt batteries two other possible
battery configurations are 24 and 48
volts and the prime advantage of going
with 24 or 48 volts is efficiency it's
much easier to go from 24 or 48 volts to
a hundred and 20 AC in the inverter than
it is to go all the way from 12 volts
220 volts put for a small grid down
system like ours 12 volts is just fine
because it's much more cost-effective
even so our 4 6 volt batteries could be
wired for 24 volts simply by connecting
them all in series like this to get 48
volts we would need a total of 8 6 volt
batteries in
Cirie's we've been talking about
everything in watts up there in the
first video we refer to everything in
watt hours and now we're talking amp
hours well to convert amp hours to watt
hours we're going to take the voltage
which is 12 and multiply it by the amp
hours which is 470 and we're going to
come up with five thousand six hundred
and forty then we're going to take that
number multiply it by about 85% to
account for some of the losses you get
in the inverter and what we end up with
is 4800 watt hours now you would think
if this chest freezer consumes 800 watt
hours of energy a day I'd have six days
of backup unfortunately that's not true
and this is where you run into the
second rule of batteries you can never
spend all that you make we're using six
volt flooded lead-acid golf cart
batteries in essence centuries-old
technology one of the drawbacks of lead
acid batteries is you should never
discharge them below 50% capacity if you
do you will severely limit the life of
the batteries in fact the less you cycle
the batteries the longer they last
if you ever totally drain a battery you
run the risk of killing it so when on
the surface looks like a 4800 watt hour
battery bank is actually a 2400 watt
hour battery bank you only get half of
what you buy in the first video I told
you I needed a thousand watt hours of
energy a day to supply my critical grid
down needs this would give me around two
and a half days backup with the four
batteries I have this is a minimal
ability to weather a few cloudy days and
remember your panels will still be
generating some energy even on overcast
days on paper this looks like a two and
a half day backup with my system but in
reality I've had it last five or six
overcast days in a row with some careful
use of power on the flip side you may
not want to size your battery bank much
more than five times what you plan to
use each day with too much capacity you
dig yourself into a hole where your
panels have a hard time fully charging
the batteries in each cycle as I
mentioned in the first video we chose to
work with batteries plus for two simple
reasons first this particular Duracell
battery fits the needs of a system of
this size and they carry them at a
decent price about 125 bucks each second
pretty much forget about shipping
batteries they're very heavy they're
considered hazardous materials and
shipping costs would exceed the cost of
the batteries in most cases batteries
plus has locations across the u.s. so
these particular batteries can be picked
up locally by you folks watching if you
live in an area where solar is more
prevalent than you may have many more
choices but battery Plus is nationwide
and this particular battery will work
for anyone and it's within driving
distance for just about anybody watching
the show in the US
so to recap when sizing your battery
bank use as a rule a minimum of two days
but not much more than five and get as
much capacity up to that five days as
your budget will allow even though my
system size that only two and a half
times what I consume I've gone five or
more overcast days in a row now this is
partially due to me sizing the
generating side at one and a half times
what I need as well there are many other
nuances and details you need to know
about batteries and we'll cover
everything you need to know both about
the batteries the box and everything in
it on it and tied to it in a future part
of the series obviously you're going to
have to install your solar system in an
area that receives full Sun for most of
the day but it's a bit more nuanced than
that especially if you install a smaller
off-grid system like ours there's going
to be two things that you're going to
have to know first the Sun isn't at the
same elevation throughout the year and
second you're going to want to try to
locate your panels as close to the
batteries as possible when picking a
spot to locate your panels you have to
consider that the Sun will be lower
towards the horizon in the winter and
closer to directly overhead in the
summer while later in the video I'll
suggest that you need to tilt your
panels as well for now know that you
must locate a spot that will be in full
Sun throughout the year how do you know
where the Sun will be
in your location there's a link to a
calculator down below in the description
in my case up north the Sun dips to just
24 degrees above the horizon in the dead
of winter but it rises to 72 degrees
above the horizon in the middle of
summer you'll have to determine your
range and make sure that your panels
have an unobstructed view of the sky you
might think that I'm on this roof
because I'm about to tell you it's the
perfect spot to mount your solar panels
while roofs are good for antennas and
for folks that have more money than they
know what to do with it might not be the
ideal spot to mount your solar panels
the first thing you have to consider is
the age of your roof a panel like a
renergie is going to last you good 25
years about the same lifespan as this
roof how old's your roof unless your
roof is brand new
you'll be removing your system at some
point to repair the roof I guess if the
grid went down tomorrow it wouldn't
matter but there's two more reasons you
might want to consider otherwise and
both have to do with efficiency while
it's possible to get a tilt system for a
roof mount it will entail you climbing
up on the roof to tilt the panel's
most roof pitches point the panel's
towards the Sun at an angle that favors
summer power generation if you can
easily walk on your roof this is the
case when winter hits and the Sun moves
lower in the sky output will be
drastically reduced
if you can't point the panel's towards
the Sun for quite a few of us we get
snow in the winter which causes two
problems first you can't get to the
panels to tilt them and second it kills
power generation when they get covered
if you can't easily clean them off
you've effectively killed your winter
power generation now I'm not saying that
you shouldn't mount your solar panels on
the roof what I am saying is to consider
these challenges if it's the only place
that you have to mount them in my case I
decided to make a frame that would put
them about eight feet up in the air and
give them an unobstructed view of the
sky no matter what time of year it also
serves a second function as the rec yard
for the chicken prison building a system
that actually tracks the Sun would be
best as the panels are always pointed
directly at the Sun but this being a
budget build and also out of my budget
maybe we'll have to save that for a
future video now you can use whatever
you want to mount your panels from
treaty two-by-fours to
laying around the house in my case I
built the frames out of unis strut unis
strut is available at any home
improvement store usually in the
electrical section it's sturdy
inexpensive and the holes just so
happened to line up with the rena gz
brackets so i didn't have to bring out
the drill for the tilting mechanism i
use screw hooks and gate straps i got
those from my local Menards using my
mounting system I can adjust the panels
till once a month to ensure they're
pointed directly at the Sun all I have
to do is remove this bolt and adjust as
necessary
your second major consideration and
locating and mounting your solar panels
is their proximity to the batteries
while the rule of thumb is to get them
as close as possible to the batteries
this isn't always the case and this is
due to the fact that solar systems use
low voltage electricity you see the more
and more power that you try and transmit
at a low voltage the thicker and thicker
the cabling must be and this can get
very costly the problem is it's very
nuanced but there's many tips and tricks
that we can employ to get around some of
these limitations but at this point
we're ready to start wiring stuff
together once you have your panels
selected and have picked a place to
mount them you're going to have to get
the power from the panels to the
batteries in the last video we said that
mounting your panels as close as
possible to the batteries was important
this is due to a simple electrical
principle that as electricity travels
down a wire it loses energy due to
resistance the longer your wire run the
more energy is wasted due to resistance
this principle plays an especially
important role in solar electricity
because the lower the voltage the more
we have to deal with this phenomena and
as far as solar power is concerned it's
pretty low voltage resistance in the
wire is directly related to the
thickness of the wire the thick of the
wire or the lower the gauge the less
resistance in the wire theoretically we
could mount our solar panels as far away
as we wanted to from the batteries but
the wire gauge in between would have to
be so thick that it would be impractical
ultimately speaking it's the cost of the
wire that limits us from mounting our
solar panels wherever we want at this
point in the series many of you watching
are designing and planning your own
off-grid solar systems and due to your
differing needs you're going to come up
with different configurations different
number of panels and
so on now I can't go through every
scenario that's out there but what I can
do is show you the different
configurations that I faced and show you
how I worried my system at this point in
the series you know that our system
contains 4 100 watt R energy panels if
your system consists of more than one
solar panel you're going to have to make
a choice in wiring you're going to have
to wire the panels together somehow to
transmit the power from the panel's to
the batteries and just like in our
battery video you're going to have to
make a choice between series and
parallel wiring each one of these r
energy 100 watt panels generates 18.9
volts and 5.2 9 amps under full Sun
multiply those two numbers together and
you come up with the 100 watts listed if
I were to take my 4 panels and wire them
in parallel that's bringing all of the
positives to one point and all of the
negatives to one point and then measure
the output I'd end up with 18 point nine
volts and 21 point 1 6 amps multiplied
18 point nine times twenty-one point one
six together and you get roughly 400
watts this is because at a parallel
system you had the amperage together and
the voltage stays the same
conversely if I were to wire them in
series taking the positive of each panel
and connecting it to the negative of
each panel and then taking my reading
from the two remaining positives and
negatives I'd get a reading of 75 point
6 volts at five point two nine amps
multiplying these two numbers together
again gives me roughly 400 watts this is
because in series we add the voltage
together and the amperage stays the same
so as you can see wiring the panel's
either way comes up with the same 400
watts but with two very different
results for volts and amps now I'm not
going to tell you which way is best per
se what I am going to do is show you
what happens when you wire the panel's
either way and then let you make the
decision let's take a look at my
situation and how wiring the panel's
either way would affect my decisions
when locating my panels the son and
spousal zoning ordinances dictated the
closest I could get my panel so the
batteries was about 60 feet while you
should try and get your panels closer
than this many of you might find
yourself in the predict
I faced if I chose the wire my panels in
parallel I would have to first
understand what happens to the power as
it traverses the 60 feet wait a question
might have popped into your head why are
the panels eighteen point nine volts I
thought this is a 12-volt system good
question well in reality to charge a
battery you're going to need to produce
about fourteen point four volts and a
fully charged battery isn't even really
a 12 volt battery it's a twelve point
seven volt battery you also have to keep
in mind that you're going to lose
voltage due to resistance over the wire
so if you start out with eighteen point
nine volts you should end up with
fourteen point four volts or higher when
you get to the batteries and lastly you
have to keep in mind that the panel's
aren't generating full voltage unless
they're under full Sun I'm going to have
to select the proper gauge wire to
transmit the power from the panel's to
the batteries and that's going to
involve you knowing two things first a
particular wire gauge can handle only so
much power or amperage and second each
wire is going to realize a different
loss over that distance the thinner the
wire the more the loss does a calculator
in the description below so you can
apply it to your situation but we're
going to have a look at our case I need
to transmit my power at eighteen point
nine volts at 21 amps over a distance of
60 feet and still end up with enough
voltage at the end to charge my
batteries as efficiently as possible a
quick look at this table reveals that
our 21 amps can be safely transmitted
via 10 gauge wire but that's only half
the story
as I mentioned the thinner the wire the
more losses will be incurred to
resistance let's take a look at how much
power we lose to resistance with this
calculator using 10 gauge wire there's a
link to it in the description below
entering in our starting voltage wire
gauge amps and the distance we see that
we lose almost two and a half volts over
the 60 feet to put this in perspective
losing two and a half volts we go from
the possibility of storing 400 watts an
hour to 346 watts an hour keep in mind
the panel's only generate full voltage
and direct Sun as well if we choose 10
gauge wire to transmit the power
54 watts to resistance in the wire alone
while we can use 10 gauge wire it's not
very efficient at all to deliver more
wattage to the batteries we would need
to increase the thickness of the wire if
we went all the way down to 3 gauge wire
and reran the calculations you'll see
that we deliver 18 point 4 volts to the
batteries a loss of only half a volt and
10 watts now 3 gauge wire is pretty
expensive if you go to the local home
improvement store you can get it but
it's probably going to cost you a couple
bucks a foot now you can choose to use
heavy gauge wire like this or you can
look at your second option and that's
wiring your panels in series
remember when you wire in series you add
the voltage together while the amperage
remains the same in my example it was 75
point 6 volts at five point two nine
amps referring to the chart I see that
five amps can use a very small gauge
wire this is how I wired my panels and
it reversed the 60 feet
I chose 12 gauge direct burial wire
running these numbers through the
calculator it shows that my voltage
dropped only by a single volt this is
because the higher the voltage the less
loss you experience to resistance and
even in a small off-grid system like
this the differences in efficiency are
pretty remarkable stepping up the
voltage is a principle that's in
practice every day all around us
in your home you typically use 120 volts
of AC power but the power companies will
step up that voltage to tens and even
hundreds of thousands of volts to
transmit it for the very same reason we
might do the same in a small solar
system to lose less energy to resistance
and to save money on wire if you can
locate your panels within 10 or 20 feet
of the batteries it really doesn't
matter if you wire them in series or
parallel but if you have a large system
or your panels are a considerable
distance from the batteries you may want
to consider stepping up the voltage even
so you might be asking yourself why
wouldn't every system be wired in series
and that brings us to the next part of
the do-it-yourself off-grid solar series
the charge controller I keep saying
panels the batteries but in reality in
between the panels and the batteries is
the charge controller and the charge
controller does exactly what its name
implies it controls the charging of the
batteries
and the charge controller brings us a
few more options and choices so stay
tuned the charge controller does exactly
as its name implies it controls the
charge of the batteries and make sure
that the batteries get the proper
voltage that they need and that they
don't get overcharged in a small
off-grid solar system like this you're
gonna have a choice between two
different types of controllers the PWM
controller and the MPPT controller the
first type of controller is called a PWM
controller like this 30-amp pwm
controller from renergie this type of
charge controller is basically a
sophisticated voltage regulator that
takes the incoming voltage from your
panels and changes it to what your
batteries need a controller like this
has a couple of good attributes they're
small simple and inexpensive this
particular controller is less than 30
bucks from renergie for simple systems
you can't go wrong with a PWM controller
if you have a single panel or a couple
of panels mounted very close by these
are perfect in fact getting your feet
wet and solar can be pretty inexpensive
you can get a single hundred watt panel
and controller for less than 200 bucks
and that will get you charging something
they're simply the only choice for very
small systems but as I mentioned this is
a 30 amp controller so its power
handling capabilities are limited take
for instance our example of 4 100 watt R
energy panels from the last video the
open circuit amperage of those panels
would be 23 amps charge controllers are
rated in open circuit amperage of which
you should never exceed 80% so 30 amps
times 80% he goes 24 amps these 4 100
watt panels put the charge controller at
its limit in a 12 volt system this PWM
charge controller only accepts a 12 volt
input and that is the second limitation
of the PWM controller if you watch the
last video in wiring the panel's a
little light might have just gone off in
your head and you might have noticed
that I can't use the PWM controller if I
wire my panels in series and that's
because I have 75 volts to deal with in
this you would be correct and that is
where the MPPT controller comes into
play
when faced with your decision to
purchase a charge controller you're
going to notice two things that people
don't ever really explain very well and
I'm going to give it a try the first are
claims of efficiency the PWM controllers
claim around an 80% efficiency while the
MPPT controllers can claim efficiencies
into the high 90s second you'll notice
that the cost increases exponentially
between a pwm controller and an MPPT
controller this charge controllers 30
bucks
this one is well over 200 and that might
be a deal-breaker right there but hold
on
you need to understand a few things
about the MPPT charge controller before
you make your decision as I just
mentioned the PWM controller must accept
near 12 volts in a 12 volt system like
ours that stops me from wiring my panels
in series because I'd have a 75 volt
input the first major advantage of an
MPPT charge controller over the PWM is
it can accept a much higher voltage in
the case of this run eg 40 amp
controller up to a hundred volts this
means I can wire my panels in series and
take advantage of two things first the
transmission of the power is far more
efficient more importantly I can use
thinner cheaper wire in my case wiring
the panel 60 feet away from the
controller I was able to save enough in
the wiring alone to nearly pay for the
cost difference between the PWM and the
MPPT for me it's a no-brainer for the
same overall cost I can gain efficiency
as I said the efficiency that the spec
sheets speak of is never adequately
explained kicking up the voltage saves
some in transmission losses but the rest
of the magic as they say is in the math
you see right as the Sun Peaks over the
horizon your panels start generating
voltage this voltage might be a meager
say four or so volts if you had wired
your system in parallel and connected
them to a pwm controller this power
wouldn't equal the 13 or 14 volts
necessary to charge a battery in short
the power is wasted but in a series
system connected to an MPPT charge
controller the voltage well it adds up
literally four panels at four volts
deliver 16 volts are enough to begin
charging the batteries
granted the amperage might be low but
your batteries begin charging the moment
the Sun peeks over the horizon an MPPT
charge controller can charge your
batteries nearly the entire time the Sun
is out the PWM has to wait until the
voltage necessary to charge the
batteries is generated this is where the
bulk of the efficiency is made up in
closing when making a decision between a
PWM and an MPPT charge controller note
that there's no real advantage with
going to an MPPT charge controller in a
single panel system if you have multiple
panels then you have to weigh the cost
versus the benefits if you want more
efficiency if your panels are far away
and you want to save money and wiring
then the MPPT might be right for you
once the power hits the controller it
heads down to the batteries in the next
video we're going to take a look at
storing the power and the battery box in
this part we're going to talk about the
battery box and solar safety both of
which are intricately intertwined wait I
know I said the S word just don't turn
off the video stick around
I got a puppet hey short hairs hi T
seriously safety is the most often
overlooked component for any
do-it-yourself project that I'm frankly
surprised that you're actually watching
this video in the second part of the
series we showed you how to choose size
and wire your batteries in this part
we're going to show you the things that
you should be concerned with when making
your battery box the battery box is all
about safety in my case I've got over
five kilowatts of energy stored in that
box enough to light this light bulb for
over 700 hours point of enclosing
batteries is to avoid having all five
kilowatt hours from discharging at once
in spectacular fashion when working with
batteries we have lots of point of
access to the power or terminals and we
really want to avoid something shorting
them or touching a positive and negative
terminal at the same time if that were
to happen you can melt the screwdriver
in half in an instant or heat a wrench
red-hot hot enough to melt through the
battery case start a fire and get acid
everywhere in short your battery box is
to keep accidents and prying hands away
from causing big troubles I use plywood
for my box but you could use virtually
any non conductive material you want
I've seen people use old furniture and
even plastic totes the point is the non
conductive material one of the major
drawbacks of using flooded lead-acid
batteries is they create hydrogen gas
when charging and anybody that's
familiar with the Hindenburg knows what
happens when hydrogen gas and a spark
find themselves in the same room luckily
the same principle that lifted the
Hindenburg into the air is the same one
that's going to keep our battery box
safe hydrogen being the lightest element
Rises so if you give it a path to rise
you won't blow up your box in our case
we drilled a 2-inch hole in the side of
the box and ran a 2-inch piece of PVC to
the outside this should create a path
for the hydrogen to harmlessly escape if
you have a larger system you may also
want to consider installing a small fan
to help the process also on my battery
box I've installed a voltmeter when the
batteries are neither being charged or
under load the meter will tell you the
approximate charge state of the
batteries I got this simple meter off of
Amazon and there's a link below in the
description it's wired into the positive
and negative terminals with a fuse on
the positive leg there's a link below to
a chart that will show you how to
translate the battery voltage to the
percentage that's charged now it's not
the best idea to keep flooded lead-acid
batteries in the house but if you live
in a northern climate you're going to
have to find a way to keep your
batteries warm batteries will lose
efficiency as the temperature drops and
they'll become downright useless in the
dead of winter if they're kept outside
and you can pretty much forget about
using the power you're generating the
system of this size to heat the
batteries because you're going to need
more than you generate the two major
things that you're trying to accomplish
with the battery box is to keep the
batteries isolated from accidents and
mishaps and vent the hydrogen to the
outside to avoid a hydrogen explosion
once you've taken care of that then you
can begin to look at other aspects of
safety in the system did somebody say
safety we're dealing with a lot of power
here enough power to injure or kill
someone if the Schumer hits the rotary
oscillator and your house catches fire
because of your solar system and your
lack of safety what then personal and
property protection are one thing but
employing safety measures can keep your
system running as well
what happens when lightning strikes
nearby instead of blowing up equipment
you can send that extra energy where it
should be going to ground instead the
first step in making your solar system
safe is making sure that there's an
automatic and a manual way to disconnect
power in each segment of the system
starting right here at the battery box
we have a 300 M manual switch to kill
the power from the batteries to the
inverter as well as a 200 amp fuse that
will blow automatically if something
were to short in the inverter at the
solar panels themselves you need a
method to kill the power manually in
this case I used an outdoor box normally
used for something like a spa that has
lugs the land the wires from the panel's
as well as a spot for a breaker in this
case I'm using the breaker as a switch
and a fuse for automatic protection the
wire runs into the house and lands at
another box usually used as an air
conditioner disconnect here I can
disconnect the power to service the
equipment indoors once the power hits
the charge controller there's another
fuse between it and the batteries once
at the batteries we get to the
previously mentioned 300 amps which
infuse just like our video on wiring
solar panels when you choose each
component it's going to have to be rated
for the amperage in the environment that
its installed
for instance the 300 amps which it
should never see 300 amps because
there's a 200 amp fuse that will blow
before it does with fuses you're going
to have to determine the proper amperage
for
each leg of your system for instance in
my system from the panel's of the charge
controller I have 75 volts and 5 amps so
I chose a 10 amp fuse but once it hits
the charge controller the voltage goes
down and the amperage can go up to about
20 so I put in a 30 amp fuse now unless
you copy our system exactly you're going
to have different results following
these suggestions will probably keep
your house from burning down but there's
still one more component to the safety
and longevity air system and that is
grounding as Preppers we want our
systems to work if they're ever called
upon if there's ever a malfunction in
one of the components or say lightning
struck nearby that stray voltage has to
go somewhere that somewhere might be
your body if you touch one of the
charge components or other components in
the system luckily for us electricity is
as lazy as my brother-in-law it will
always follow the path of least
resistance so what do you do to get rid
of stray electricity you give it the
path of least resistance instead of
allowing this errant voltage to find a
path through good components or through
a person you're building a highway for
these lazy electrons and they can't
resist it
grounding your system is quite easy to
do so get an 8-foot grounding rod and
drive it into the ground then pick up
some copper grounding wire some lugs and
connect the frames of all the panels and
any metal components in the system in my
case this included the disconnect charge
controller and inverter one thing that
you have to understand about electricity
is although it's lazy it's always on the
move and it's always going to fine
ground so if this component becomes
charged and I touch it and I'm touching
the ground the electricity is going to
travel through me
if however there's an easier path to
ground such as through this lug and out
to the grounding rod it's going to
choose that way grounding is a must that
will increase the chances of both you
and your system will survive the
apocalypse and comparatively speaking
it's the least expensive component in
the system so don't overlook it so the
grid went down you woke up one day no
power no cell phones no internet once
communications are lost you might never
know what happened you're simply thrust
into a new world bewildered in my case I
know what happened but more on that
later the important part is the grid
went down and you had the forethought to
generate your own power my opening
statement in the series was that you
don't need electricity to survive and
that is true but there are certain
things that you cannot do without it in
the first video in the series we talked
about understanding solar power as money
and your system the bank you can never
spend more than you make
and in a grid down scenario this could
never be more true we explain all the
basic rules and if you missed it there's
some links below even with those basic
rules there's a few nuances you're going
to want to be aware of
everybody's electrical loads are going
to be different and you should have
sized your system accordingly our
example was a chest freezer that's going
to run continuously yours may be
different it's in the extra power that
you generate above these loads where
things get interesting the most
interesting thing I've found so far
living with solar power is how much
energy is potentially wasted if you
sized your system larger than your
continuous loads then there's going to
come a point on most sunny days where
your batteries are fully charged from
there on out even if there's hours of
sunlight left there's no place for that
power to go and it's wasted in a grid
down scenario you're going to find
yourself making it a point to spend that
power in the late afternoon for folks
who prepared late afternoon might be a
time to run the vacuum cleaner wash a
load of dishes or wash a load of clothes
you might even consider charging the
neighbors a can of beans to watch a DVD
the point is on some sunny days you're
going to have power to spare and you're
going to have to spend it right at that
moment
speaking of sunny days it'd be nice to
know when those are going to happen
wouldn't it but it's grid down and
there's no weatherman or is there I
don't give up quite easily and I found
two solutions that are going to help me
spend my power when the grid goes down
the first is this accurate weather
station at 3 watts I can afford to spend
the power on a device that can give me a
good estimate of tomorrow's weather it's
reasonably accurate and can help me in
my decision on whether to spend a large
amount of power today or wait the
transmitter runs two years on a set of
lithium batteries so I figure I might
give decent weather prediction at a very
low power cost for quite a few years to
come if that isn't enough there's
another really cool option for
predicting the weather if the grid goes
down at least for a couple years anyway
if you want to see what the weather is
like across the country or if you want
to see if there's any big storms
approaching with this $25 USB device and
this home
antenna you can download weather data
directly from satellites as long as the
grid wasn't brought down by an EMP or a
CME in which case you'd have bigger
problems whether satellites should be at
your disposal for some time more on this
in a future video earlier I mentioned I
knew why the grid went down and I know
why the grid went down because I'm a ham
radio operator without electricity
instant communications are impossible
a solar backup for communications was
one of the essential reasons for my
system luckily for you if you join both
clubs amateur radio and solar power that
is you'll find yourself in great company
they're more than enough of us to get
the word out in a disaster and a great
deal of us also utilize renewable energy
as a backup source of power for
communications even if you don't want to
become a licensed amateur radio operator
we're going to show you in a future
video how you can inexpensively listen
to the same things that we do I spent
the entire series talking about things
that you can do with this system but
there's going to be some things that
you'll no longer be able to do some of
those things include heating anything
with electricity while you might get
away with heating up some leftovers in a
microwave or making a pot of coffee
heating anything else is a complete
waste using electricity for heating is a
waste now let alone in a grid down
scenario I can run tons of gear with my
system but if I run a space heater for
anything more than an hour I completely
blow out my battery bank the same is
true with air conditioning while you
might be able to treat yourself to a
15-minute blast from a window unit
during peak Sun hours 24 hour air
conditioning will be a thing of the past
while I can't continue my normal usage
with this grid down system I can
complete most of the tasks to continue a
semblance of the day when power was
limitless it just takes some careful
power use planning on cloudy stretches
it might also mean going without for a
bit and besides I have a guilty
conscience I like to show you guys
things that use electricity so there you
have it it's been a year since the
off-grid solar series and I'm happy to
say that the system has worked pretty
much flawlessly all the links mentioned
in the video
can be accessed via the link in the
description below to the tenant ranches
ultimate guide to off-grid solar power
solar power is an integral component to
continuing life with a modern semblance
of convenience and this for sure won't
be the last of our videos on solar in
fact be sure to stay tuned and subscribe
to the tenant ranch if you haven't
already as we have some new series in
the works one of which will give you a
look at the light can power box it's a
new product for energy that's going to
revolutionize parts of what you just
looked at in short imagine a box that
contains all the components - the panels
in a system that's the charge controller
inverter and a 900 watt hour battery in
a portable package that weighs less than
70 pounds check out a preview in the
links below and thanks for watching if
you found this information insightful
drop us a comment hit the like button
below share this video with your friends
and subscribe to the tin hat ranch
channel thanks for watching
you